The Book Of Me
If you could see into your future, would you want to?
If you could know whether you're going to contract Alzheimer's, or if you're likely to battle cancer or die of heart disease, would you want to?
Last summer Richard Powers decided he did and became one of nine people on earth to have his entire genome sequenced.
Here, a glimpse into his--and your--future
By Richard Powers
I come from a long line of folks, on my mother's side, with congenital difficulty making choices.
My father's family, on the other hand, are born snap deciders.
This time the paternal genes won out, and half an hour after reading the invitation, I was on board.
So I went shopping.
A day online gave me my first taste of the bewildering range of consumer genetic products.
There was Family Tree DNA, specializing in tracing genetic genealogies.
There was DNA Direct, whose Web site asked, “Do you have a chronic, undiagnosed condition?
It could be genetic.” For $260, I could get tested for cystic fibrosis; for $370, I could learn whether I'm at elevated risk of developing type 2 diabetes.
Then there was Iceland-based deCODEme (“This is myCODE”), which could calculate my risks for twenty-five genetic maladies in one $985 package.
But why stop with just a few disease tests?
As I always say, in for a few plot complications, in for the whole story.
Among the most visible of new genotyping services was 23andMe, with their slogan “Genetics just got personal.” Their attractive pastel home page wondered, “What do your genes say about you?
Who were your ancient ancestors?
Do you have your mother's sense of taste?” For $999, a signed consent with legal waiver, and a cupful of spit, 23andMe would look at 600,000 SNPs—single-nucleotide polymorphisms, or individual points of possible variance—within the 6 billion base pairs of my diploid genome.
I could then use the site's interactive tools to browse the data and learn what my mutations mean.
Upping the ante a little was Navigenics (“My genes. My health. My life”).
For $2,500 they would scan more than a million of my SNPs (pronounced “snips”) and supply me with genetic counseling to help me interpret the results.
For a $250 subscription, I could get annual updates that would keep me current with the ﬂood of new discoveries.
But these companies were selling genotyping, not full sequencing.
They could identify some alleles—variations of particular genes—and tell me a little bit about the risks, predispositions, and susceptibilities I had inherited.
They would look at something on the order of .02 percent of my 6 billion data points, with less than perfect accuracy.
They were at best marketing a thumbnail synopsis, or better, an index of a book no one really knows how to read.
I was after the unabridged version itself.
How big a number is 6 billion?
The diploid genome has nearly as many independent data points as there are individual humans.
If a standard 250-page book comprises about 500,000 letters, you would need 12,000 such books to publish an individual genome.
Laid out in a line the diameter of a penny, the base pairs of the genome would circle the earth about three times.
If the genome were a tune played at a nice bright allegro tempo of 120 beats per minute, it would take just short of a century to play.
Knome, Inc., another brand-new venture, was offering the whole 6-billion-base-pair sequence.
Their bare, Zen-like Web site—“Know thyself”—announced that they were looking for twenty individuals who were ready to shed the unexamined life for whatever happens next.
By being among the first individuals in history to have their whole genome sequenced, these participants will help pioneer the emerging field of personal genomics.
Only three human beings—James Watson, J. Craig Venter, and an anonymous Chinese scientist—had had their essentially complete diploid genomes sequenced.
A few more were in the works.
Already the race was under way to make the process ordinary.
Here was my real story: the infancy of direct-to-consumer complete genetic blueprints.
There was just one catch.
Knome's whole-genome sequence cost more than a third of a million dollars.
However deep GQ ’s pockets might be, they weren't shelling out that kind of cash for a glimpse at anyone's future.
I went back to shopping.
That's when I came across the Personal Genome Project (PGP), a remarkable nonprofit test bed under the auspices of Harvard.
Ten volunteers had already signed up to sequence most of the regions of the genome known to have especially high medical or functional significance.
This came to about 1 percent of the total 6 billion base pairs—midway between 23andMe's .02 percent sampling and Knome's 98 percent whole genome.
Most impressive of all, the sequencing would be free, provided the volunteers made their information publicly available.
I e-mailed the project's director, George Church, to see if I might become the eleventh PGP volunteer.
He wrote back saying that as long as I could pass an exam demonstrating a master's-degree level of understanding about genetics, they could use me.
I commenced to cram.
Among an exhausting list of other responsibilities, George Church directs the Lipper Center for Computational Genetics at Harvard Medical School.
More than twenty years ago, for his Ph.D.
under Nobelist Walter Gilbert, Church developed the first direct genomic-sequencing method.
As a postdoc at Biogen and UCSF, he helped initiate the Human Genome Project (which would ultimately produce the first full sequence of human DNA).
A decade later, he was still pioneering, helping to refine second-generation genome sequencing into something several orders of magnitude faster and cheaper than its predecessors.
A few years ago, Church decided that it was time to bring the world reliable, effective, and responsible genomes for all.
Trade in a whole new kind of consumer good was about to explode, and society was as yet unprepared.
A race to discover and market genetic associations could result in the privatization of vast amounts of genetic information.
Unrealistic promises of data security by large biobanks could result in chaotic or hampered research, exploitative business practices, and ultimate public backlash.
Church hoped to preempt all that with a collaborative public project—the PGP.
As he told the journal Nature in a piece about the project, “We have to get this in place before everything just goes crazy.”
The PGP is founded on the belief that turning genomic information to the greatest value for humanity will depend upon the wide-scale involvement of an informed and invested general public.
Only by matching tens of thousands of individual genomes with personal and medical histories will researchers learn how to interpret the sequences that we can now so proudly spell out.
And the quickest and best way to match data sets that size is out in the open air, under the public eye, with data shared by all.
The design of the PGP confronts head-on one of the main hot-button issues of genetics: privacy.
Church believes that genomic research can't both guarantee the confidentiality of genetic information and share it.
If society must choose between data security and enjoyment of all the benefits of shared knowledge, Church thinks we should adjust and share.
We've gotten used to surrendering our anonymity and security every time we walk out of a restaurant leaving an imprint of our credit card.
We now potentially surrender a whole lot more every time we leave behind a drinking glass with a little saliva in it.
Google “surreptitious sampling” for a look at things to come.
Church believes that publicizing genetic data should be no riskier than printing your number and address in the phone book.
He contends that the risks of genetic-based job discrimination, insurance refusal, or social ostracism are best solved not by evasion but by confrontation.
And going all-in on that particular bet, he long ago posted his medical records on the Web and has become PGP volunteer number one.
The idea of contributing to a vast, wiki-like public library of genetic research greatly appealed to me.
But I couldn't quite imagine putting my comprehensive genetic data—data that also belonged to my whole family—online.
I could see how ordinary all this will one day become, how declaring whether you had the version of the APOE gene that correlates with late-onset Alzheimer's might one day become as normal as slapping a pub shot up on your blog or discussing your Zoloft dosage at a dinner party.
I just couldn't bring myself to become one of the first dozen people to inhabit the place.
I went back to sniffing around the site of Knome, Inc., the high-end purveyors of the full sequence, the ones who promised me a private copy of my personal genome, guaranteed by “confidential information management processes that have been successfully applied in the defense industry.” In further exploring their site, I discovered that Knome, too, had been co-founded by George Church.
After more searching, I learned that George Church was also a scientific adviser to the competing genotyping boutiques DNA Direct and 23andMe.
I'd wandered into a Pynchon novel for the post–Bayh-Dole biocapitalist age: The Crying of Lot Six Billion.
Curiosity may be just suspicion co-opted by endorphins.
I had no idea what I was blundering into.
But I figured I could start learning now about privacy and public good, research and entrepreneurship, risk and susceptibility—all the dangers of knowing the full story—or I could bump up against them later, along with the rest of unwitting humanity.
And for a comprehensive genetic sequence now, Knome was my ticket.
Maybe we could cut a deal.
It turned out we could.
For a portion of the price of their full offering, Knome proposed to make a rough cartoon of my entire genome followed by a more accurate look at those fractions of the genome known to have medical and developmental significance.
Think of the compromise as a kind of Google Earth: a blurry sketch of the continents interspersed with zoomed-in, higher-resolution insets of those regions with deeper significance, insets where you can see the individual needles on a pine tree or read the numbers off a license plate.
Even this more abbreviated readout would take months to complete, require the efforts of dozens of people, and produce a volume hundreds of thousands of pages long whose intricate networks of interacting chemical protagonists hinted at dramatic interactions beyond anyone's ability to interpret, let alone follow.
To get a copy of my full catalog of inheritance, I will ﬂy in three days to Boston, a town where, long ago, I began my adult life, worked my first job, and wrote my first novel.
I haven't been back for a quarter of a century.
This time, the place will deliver me another kind of book altogether.
And in order to get it, all I need to surrender is a wad of GQ 's cash, four vials of blood, and the blissful ignorance of my unexamined life.
COMPLICATION
I arrive in Boston on the day after Easter, the fourth day of spring.
My hotel stands seventy-five yards from Bulfinch's State House and is even closer to the Granary Burying Ground, with its Founding Fathers buried shoulder to shoulder.
The day is beautiful, and as I walk through the historic downtown, several people with an array of accents stop and ask me to take their photos.
Their faces display a bewildering rainbow of phenotypes, but any one of their genomes is likely to differ from mine at no more than one in 1,000 data points, most of which make little difference in development.
Even adding in other kinds of mutations—insertions, deletions, and variations in the number of copies of certain genes—any two of us are likely to be 99.5 percent similar.
I take pictures of people from many continents, people whose most recent common ancestor may date back no more than 100,000 years.
Their cameras differ more than they do.
I cross the Common with my senses on edge.
The purpose of my visit has already set me time-traveling.
I walk through the Public Garden into Copley Square and down the full length of the Back Bay.
Spring has the whole city germinating.
I'm ﬂooded with the memory of the books I read in the years when I walked this route back home each night from work: Madame Bovary , with its subplot of private medical research gone horribly wrong. Middlemarch , with its search for the Key to All Mythologies, a search that has migrated into the life sciences these days.
And of course, The Magic Mountain , whose hero, convinced that the newly discovered X-rays are a glimpse inside people's souls, carries around an X-ray photograph of his beloved as a kind of erotic fetish.
A few years from now, people may carry around their loved ones' personal genomes on USB key fobs.
All those books wrestle with the limits of the human—whether to accept them nobly or rage against them all the way to death.
As I walk through the Victory Gardens, I wonder what tomorrow's novels will look like, when the limits to the natural course of human life will be up for grabs again.
I reach the Fens, where I once lived with a woman whom I'd talked into moving to this city.
We broke up, in part, over the children issue.
Neither she nor I nor the man she married nor the woman I married have ever procreated.
At least 25 percent of us is a full-ﬂedged Supporter of the Voluntary Human Extinction Movement.
But I think of all the couples, in the years to come, who will study their own genomes out of concern over what they might hand down to their offspring.
There will be those who demand (or even steal) a copy of their betrothed's full sequence before signing the prenup.
I swing past Fenway Park and through the student crowds in Kenmore Square, wondering how genetic profiling will eventually change sports and education.
Then, as dusk sets in, I make the long walk back up to Beacon Hill to meet Knome's co-founder and CEO for dinner.
Jorge Conde is a poised, business-casual man in his early thirties who insists on holding doors open for me.
He finds us a quiet table where we can talk shop.
He tells me about going from a childhood in Miami, the son of a Peruvian doctor father and Cuban mother, to a biology degree at Johns Hopkins and a Harvard MBA.
He has worked in every aspect of the biotech business, including as an investment banker for Morgan Stanley.
He likes the word actionable , as in “Most of what you will learn from sequencing your genome will be probabilistic and not actionable.”
But Conde assures me that the action is coming, and quickly.
He describes how, with a reference human genome now in place, the task of assembling the millions of short fragments of sequenced DNA into a full genome has become infinitely cheaper and easier.
Think of solving a jigsaw puzzle with a box picture, compared to doing the same puzzle without.
He says that the price of sequencing the short fragments is itself in free fall, the result of miniaturizing the reading process, with a consequent savings on reagents.
The Human Genome Project cost roughly $3 billion.
The first full sequencing of a single human being, James Watson, came in under a thousandth of that price.
Knome is currently charging less than a third of the cost of “Project Jim” and will reevaluate their price continuously over the tumultuous months ahead.
The magic target of the $1,000 genome, Conde suggests, may be no more than a few years away.
And as the price of genotyping and sequencing falls, the rate of novel genetic discoveries in laboratories across the world is skyrocketing.
Conde mentions a rate of about two to three medically significant genetic discoveries a year at the turn of the twenty-first century, before the completion of the Human Genome Project.
The figure for last year, by comparison, was closer to one hundred.
Since 2006, gene-scan studies have found more than one hundred DNA variants that contribute to about forty maladies ranging from restless leg syndrome to ALS.
In 2007 alone, scientists discovered genetic associations for a dozen different diseases.
Knowledge may not yet be power, at least not for the early adopters of whole-genome sequencing; right now, the personal genome may still be the conspicuous-consumption, recreational, luxury item that the press has sometimes accused it of being.
But given the explosion of genetic discoveries, it is also a commodity guaranteed to soar in value in the run of time.
Conde tells me about Knome's customers.
Two are already in the pipeline, and another half a dozen are close to committing.
Knome expects to commence sequencing twenty genomes in the first year.
“We get several serious inquiries a week,” he says.
“They come from all over the globe.
We are talking to prospective clients in Japan, Russia, Korea, the Middle East, and the UK.” In the States, the company has had the most interest from Hollywood moguls and Wall Street hedge-fund managers.
Not every inquiry they receive is equally well considered.
They had a long conversation, for instance, with a wealthy Colombian who wanted to sequence his prize racehorse.
“Why do that,” Conde wonders, “when he can just clone it?”
Knome is not so much in the business of supplying raw data as of adding interpretive value.
Without such interpretation, the sequence itself is worthless.
What was once unthinkably difficult—the actual mapping of the 6 billion nucleotides that serve as the informational “bits” of the genome—is rapidly becoming routine.
The hard work now is learning how to read that recipe.
“The task of combing through genetic data is a software problem,” Conde says.
“The challenge is to put the data into the hands of individuals in a way that is meaningful and manageable.” He grows excited when he envisions clients matching their personal genomic information against all of the world's available genetic findings and letting the coordinating software find relevant news stories, treatments, suggestions for behavioral change, specific advice about personally tailored medications, professionals you might profitably consult, specialists you might want to meet, foods you should seek out or avoid… Knome, it seems, is in a race to become a genomic combination of Google, Bloomberg box, and WebMD.
Our genetic variants will become data queries, our haplotypes a kind of Facebook account for new kinds of special-interest networking, our personal set of alleles a new source of digitally updated identity.
After dinner, on my walk back up the hill to the hotel, I wonder if we are prepared to live so intimately with our genetic risks and trait dispositions, whether we're really ready to send our inheritance ﬂoating out so promiscuously for interpretation in the burgeoning informational space of genetic discovery.
But as I go to sleep, it strikes me that technological ability always trumps readiness.
Ready or not, here comes the world of the personal genome.
The next morning, as he fights a BMW Zipcar through insane traffic, Jorge Conde asks me, only partly in jest, how long I think we'll have to wait before they invent the matter transporter.
We're on our way to the office of George Church at Harvard Medical School, but the snarl of rush hour is proving vicious.
Conde, a congenital optimist, doesn't see why teleportation isn't conceivable.
He mentions the recent laboratory successes with single-particle quantum tunneling.
It's just a matter of scaling up, he insists.
I laugh, before remembering that we're embarking on something that was once every bit as inconceivable.
The light posts running along Main Street and down Mass. Ave.
all the way from MIT to Harvard Square are adorned with colorful banners celebrating the twenty-three human chromosomes.
I try to picture my own chromosomal set; I have trouble visualizing how one meter of DNA can twist up into hypercoiled filaments a thousandth of a millimeter long inside every one of my more than 50 trillion cells.
The DNA molecule is an immense string of four kinds of nucleotide bases—the familiar A, T, G, and C—and the order of nucleotide bases along certain segments of that long string encodes the formulas for making proteins.
Proteins are the workhorse molecules that participate in every essential aspect of the body's chemistry and structure.
And these sequences of nucleotide bases that encode for proteins are called genes.
Genes can also code for other kinds of nucleic-acid strings that help regulate that expression of genes themselves.
For instance, a sequence of several hundred bases on chromosome 22 make up the gene that codes for the protein myoglobin, the oxygen-carrying pigment of muscle tissue.
The human genome contains about 22,000 genes, which average somewhere between 10,000 and 15,000 base pairs long.
That seems like a very modest toolset.
But these 22,000 genes can each make several different kinds of proteins with different chemical properties—over a million proteins in all.
Genes can have many different viable variants, each one called an allele.
When DNA replicates, small errors during copying can garble the bases in the sequence.
For instance, a stretch of the myoglobin gene might be erroneously copied from
TGTGTGGGTTAGGAAAAGGCACCC…
to
TGTGTGGGTTAGGAAACGGCACCC…
Changes in the nucleotide sequence of a gene can change the structure and function of the protein it encodes, or they can change when and how much of the protein is made.
These differences, sculpted by natural selection, result in all the variation of life, from bacteria to blue whales.
