The entire runaway experimental pyramiding scheme results from the differential field-testing and selecting of these garbled bits of code across billions of years.
So what about the enormous majority of the genome with no known function?
It turns out that much of those vast, mysterious tracts that used to be called “junk DNA” have been faithfully preserved over eons and seem to have gene-regulatory functions.
I'm guessing that if those stretches are junk, they're the kind of junk that will come down out of the attic to fetch big prices on Antiques Roadshow.
No matter what, in a few months Conde will hand me my own 6-billion-base sequence, so that I can follow along as scientists learn how to read that inscrutable inheritance.
But first he has to get us to George Church's office.
“I inherited an absolutely terrible sense of direction,” he confesses.
“I've got the disorientation allele.
I can only get from A to B along a route that I already know.”
We drive through an area of my old beloved Cambridge that has been transformed beyond recognition by a billion-dollar MIT construction program.
Buildings from playful to sinister, many by prestige architects, spring up on every wedge of available land while cranes hoist up more of them by the month.
The boom is fueled by a biotech industry that has yet to come near to fulfilling its much hyped promise.
There seems to be no end of money that might be made from the molecularization of human health.
I'M EXPECTING George Church—the Edison of genomic sequencing, sometime adviser for twelve scientific journals, five granting agencies, and twenty-four biotech companies—to be an enigmatic, mercurial Mamet antihero.
In fact, he turns out to be more like something out of Shaw: articulate, playful, by turns sanguine and ironic, and above all inventive.
He claims to have repeated ninth grade and ﬂunked out of Duke graduate school, but within ten words I see that he's one of the most independent and penetrating minds I've ever had the pleasure to meet.
A six-foot-five-inch rock climber, robotics hobbyist, ice swimmer, aquaculturist, and turtle breeder who suffers from narcolepsy, Church could go up against any scientist in fiction, although he's too productive and colorful to be realistic.
We sit in Church's glass-lined corner office in the New Research Building of Harvard Medical School, a room that, aside from a shelf of journals and a couple of photos of his wife and daughter, feels almost austere by scientists' standards.
I ask Church what he thinks about press coverage that has called personal genomics premature, disruptive, or dangerous.
He smiles, entertaining all possibilities.
“As with most technologies, somebody manages to eke out a living raising alarms, and I think that's good.
Others say there's nothing here and everybody can go back to work.
And then there's the third camp, which excitedly asks, 'What's next?
What have you done for us lately?'
”
He defends the coming revolution, comparing it to the birth of personal computing in the late 1970s.
That earlier revolution was all about mass empowerment, going, he says, “from a few people in the priesthood that guarded the mainframes, to everybody.” But few people saw the potential of that revolution early on: “Just like with personal computing, until there are some compelling stories involving real products, the only people who are going to get what's happening are the ones who can imagine things that aren't yet there.”
As far as Church is concerned, giving every person his or her own complete genetic information is “part of an experiment that's unfolding about how much individualized self-knowledge will change us.” He's curious to see, for instance, whether a person who learns he has several specific genes that predispose him to lung cancer might finally be motivated to quit smoking.
As for people who learn of greatly elevated risks for untreatable diseases like Huntington's or Alzheimer's, they'll simply be part of the same grand experiment in increased knowledge and personal responsibility.
I ask him if the general public is ready for that kind of accountability.
He's optimistic about the average person's ability to understand what's happening in the genomic revolution.
I point to naive public discussions about single genes that supposedly cause alcoholism, aggression, or homosexuality.
He shrugs off the objection.
“They know that's just a shorthand; they know genes are more complicated than that.
They know that environment affects those traits, too.” He has no problem with the idea that people who spend hundreds of dollars a year on lottery tickets will be able to understand the complex mathematical prognoses hidden in their genome.
“Sure, people act irrationally, but most of them understand probability.
They just choose to ignore it.” I don't remind him that by some polls, only about a third of Americans believe in evolution—roughly the same percentage as believe in ﬂying saucers.
I ask why anyone would want to run out and get his genome sequenced if all he can learn is all the probabilities of things going wrong.
In the near term, Church argues, early adopters will purchase their own genomes the way people buy insurance policies, hoping the thing never gets used.
In the midterm, personal genomics will give people a chance to get involved in research.
Pooling large numbers of genomes and running association studies on them will rapidly increase our genetic understanding and power.
Church thinks that a single cheap genomic scan integrated into every individual's medical records will greatly improve health care and produce an incalculable return on investment.
In the long term, Church sees the personal genome as one more essential step in optimizing human well-being and mastering the material conditions of life.
I try out various scenarios on him: personally tailored drugs, in vitro trait selection, even trans-human genetic enhancement.
Are these ideas just science fiction?
“Oh no,” he says.
“So much is already happening that it's hard to imagine that some variation on all those things is not going to come true.”
I ask if genomicists will ever be able to look at a person's alleles and deduce something about his or her temperament.
I have in mind the novelist's territory, those mysterious components—warmth, spontaneity, humor—that, however uncomfortable it makes us to admit, seem to be somewhat to largely heritable.
Will a genetic signature ever help us understand the origin of high-level behavioral traits?
Church gazes off into the distance, with that look of pure experimental pleasure.
“Well, I don't think there's a huge difference between high-level behavioral traits, low-level behavioral traits, and physical traits,” he says.
“They're all physical, in some sense.”
I probe the limits of Church's vision of molecular control.
Will the day ever come when the probabilistic nature of genetic prediction will sharpen into something more definitive?
He happily takes the bait.
“Maybe asymptotically,” he says.
Most hunters and gatherers, he argues, would never have been able to wrap their heads around the concept of a supermarket.
The naysayers would have insisted that landing food was always going to remain probabilistic, that no amount of technology would ever make the satisfaction of hunger anything more than a matter of chance.
“But the naysayers were wrong.”
At last I pose the question that has haunted me for two decades: Is he at all worried about the new juggernaut created by embedding commerce so completely into experimental research, and vice versa?
Has the pursuit of new markets taken over life science?
Does profit now play a greater role in the laboratory than truth?
I sound ingenuous, even to myself.
Church blinks at my naïveté, then slyly ducks the question.
" “At least with corporate \science\? they're taking chances,” he says. "
“I think what's good about our current system is that there are so many ways of being a scientist, so many ways of being a businessperson.” He cites the blossoming of business models in recent years.
“You get things like nonprofit pharmaceutical companies or for-profit charities.
You get people who create encyclopedias online where there's nobody in charge.
If all of that can be invented in just a very short period of time, just imagine what we can do!
I like invention, and if you can start inventing the way you invent and inventing the ways that you distribute and inventing the ways that you educate, and if all these things are subject to invention, then we've got a very interesting few decades ahead of us.”
Of that, I have no doubt.
Church stands, unfolds his hunched body to its towering height, and walks me through the lab.
The lab is like labs everywhere: a systematic, organized bedlam of agents and reagents.
Bench after bench of gear from ﬂasks to electronic black boxes all seem poised on the verge of some new refinement.
Down a long hallway, tucked all the way into a back corner, is the new baby: the Polonator G.007, a second-generation sequencer somewhat smaller than a dishwasher, which costs $155,000.
It's just now coming into production, a little too late to be the machine that will sequence my genome.
But it promises to be the fastest and cheapest sequencing apparatus yet, and it will sequence no end of genomes after mine.
The Polonator, Church says, is customizable for multiple chemistries, “kind of like the old cars that a regular teenager could turn into a hot rod.” It employs a cartridge the size of a small paperback book filled with a grid of 2 billion oil-emulsion beads one micron in diameter.
Bound to each bead are tens of thousands of identical short fragments of DNA, each roughly 135 base pairs long.
The beads are bathed in nucleotide bases, each A, T, G, and C tagged with a corresponding ﬂuorescent marker.
As the ﬂuorescently tagged bases align with their complements in the template sequence, a digital camera snaps pictures of the ﬂuorescent signals and sends them to a computer for analysis.
The whole unthinkably small and nimble process can sequence thousands of bases a second, with an accuracy, after seven reads, of one error per 3 million base pairs.
The short sequenced fragments are then matched against the known reference human genome, like millions of mosaic bits assembled on top of a wall sketch.
Overlap these aligned fragments until each of the 6 billion nucleotide bases in a person's genome has been sampled a dozen or more times, and you have a reasonably accurate picture of that person's genetic secrets.
Church wants personal sequencing to become one of the quickest, surest, and cheapest tools in the arsenal of medical diagnostics.
" He says, as if he's hit on a new way of making shoes, “We hope to get the cost down to under $100 per billion base pairs \of raw data\? within a year.” "
I'm like one of those hunters and gatherers, seeing frozen lasagna for the first time.
IN THE AFTERNOON Conde takes me to the Knome offices near Kendall Square, sixteen ﬂoors above the Charles River.
The day is crisp, clear, and gorgeous.
The Boston skyline, so changed since my days here, still preserves the ghosts of its prior incarnations, from the Citgo sign to the Old South Meeting House.
As I pick out the historical landmarks, I think of how my genome will reveal the kernel of past incarnations.
Maybe it will show susceptibility to the colon cancer that killed my father when he was my age.
Or maybe it will hint at future pulmonary problems, like the ones that now plague my mother in her seventies.
But there will be deeper time travel, too.
More than 80 percent of the genes that Knome will turn up in me have precise counterparts in the genome of mice.
Our genomic suite has preserved intact genes shared with C. elegans , a worm with which we parted evolutionary ways over 600 million years ago.
In only slightly different form, the calmodulin gene that makes a paramecium seek food and evade danger in a pond still plays a similar role in helping to regulate human mental functions.
I'm wondering, as I take stock of what I've gotten myself into, whether that particular gene is functioning in me as well as it should.
Ari Kiirikki, Knome's vice president of sales and business development, steps me through the coming process.
Tomorrow morning, I will have my blood drawn.
The blood will travel to a facility in New Jersey, where technicians will isolate and purify the DNA.
My purified DNA will then travel to Shenzhen, where scientists at the Beijing Genomics Institute will sequence it using sixteen second-generation machines made by Illumina that operate in ways similar to the Polonator that George Church showed me in his office at Harvard.
For all the usual reasons.
A team of twenty-three people will work on the laborious process for six weeks.
That kind of intensive skilled labor would be prohibitively expensive in the States.
In addition, where our elected officials are now at war with science, the BGI is funded handsomely by the Chinese government, including support for such popular projects as sequencing the giant-panda genome and the rice genome.
China is embracing the genomics revolution with much less religious and social ambivalence than North America.
Along with everything else, the center of scientific culture is shifting in the Pacific Century.
What happens once my DNA reaches China is subject to change.
The few different possibilities are contingent on very rapid developments in hardware and software.
Knome is improvising as ﬂuidly and continuously as the rest of us will have to once the revolution hits.
AFTER MY BRIEFING, Conde and I head to an Afghani restaurant for dinner with Raju Kucherlapati, distinguished geneticist, professor, and scientific director of the Harvard Partners Center for Genetics and Genomics.
He, too, is a co-founder and board member of several biotech companies.
Conde wants me to meet one of the most respected advocates for genetic medicine.
Kucherlapati is an amiable, engaging man who laughs easily and often.
He believes that personalized medicine is already graduating from speculation to practice.
More than 1,600 genetic screens now exist, with over 1,300 already moving “from bench to bedside.” A cheap personal genome would replace them all in one package.
Kucherlapati holds out great hope for the burgeoning field of pharmacogenomics.
Today's approach to drug prescription, he laments, is a trial-and-error buckshot affair where pharmaceutical companies push blockbuster drugs on broad segments of the population, often with limited effectiveness and many adverse side effects.
(By some estimates, the typical prescription drug helps only 50 to 60 percent of the time.) But association studies are revealing more and more about what kinds of genetic makeups will respond to which medications at what dosages.
Knowing a person's genes, Kucherlapati hopes, will help turn drug prescription into something much more evidence-based, narrowly targeted, and exact, greatly improving outcomes and reducing side effects.
He also predicts that all newborns might one day be subject to routine whole-genome scans, holding out hope for all kinds of early detection and intervention.
The cost of infant screening for several genetic conditions is now a couple of hundred dollars, often paid by the state.
A couple of thousand dollars for a whole genome sequence might pay for itself several times over by the time any newborn reaches adulthood.
As for the perils of looking into his own future, Kucherlapati himself is quite ready, “even as an older person,” to have his complete genome sequenced.
He's not particularly concerned about the majority of dire information that sequencing might reveal—all the predispositions about which medicine can as yet do nothing.
I wonder out loud if we aren't in danger of pathologizing ordinary health, turning us all into pre-patients for diseases we are only at risk of contracting.
He responds by asking me why I'm not eating any of the delicious Afghani meat dishes spread in front of us.
I confess to having had a lipid panel recently: combined score 207.
Kucherlapati holds up his hands, vindicated.
We're already there.
He says that gene tests will work much like a cholesterol screen, only they will give us personalized targets and much more specific knowledge.
I ask if that's a good thing or a bad one.
No one answers, and none of us have dessert.
I go back to the hotel and lie in bed reading the Knome consent form, which I must sign before the blood drawing tomorrow morning.
It's far and away the strangest, most disconcerting agreement I've ever signed.
The risks of public disclosure of your genotype and phenotype information could affect your employment, or insurance for you or your immediate family.
You may learn information that you do not anticipate.… You agree that you will not use the information you learn from Knome to diagnose, or treat any condition or disease and that you understand that Knome's services are intended for informational and research purposes only.… These results may change over time based on increased scientific knowledge.… NEITHER KNOME, NOR ITS DIVISIONS, SUBSIDIARIES, SUCCESSORS, PARENT COMPANIES, AFFILIATES OR THEIR EMPLOYEES, PARTNERS, PRINCIPALS, AGENTS AND REPRESENTATIVES, NOR ANY OTHER PARTY INVOLVED IN CREATING, PRODUCING OR DELIVERING WHOLE-GENOME SEQUENCING, ANALYSIS, INTERPRETATION, OR COUNSELING IS LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, INDIRECT, PUNITIVE OR ANY OTHER DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF SUCH SERVICES OR YOUR USE OF THESE SERVICES.
THIS INCLUDES LIABILITY FOR PERSONAL INJURY OR DEATH.… If you have any living siblings who are your identical (monozygotic) twin, then Knome requires the sibling(s) to provide their written consent.…
I close my eyes and sleep fitfully.
I wake up at 2:30 am, convinced I have to back out.
THE NEXT MORNING, I sit with Ari Kiirikki in an Infiniti SUV, in the parking lot of a Wellesley clinic by the Charles, holding a FedEx shipping box marked caution: biohazard.
On the drive out, Kiirikki has been telling me marvelous stories about his Finnish ancestors, and I've been considering my total ignorance of mine.
Both my grandfathers died of heart attacks before I was born, and my grandmothers never spoke of their ancestors, let alone any family medical history.
I'm soon going to find out a little more about my roots—open-ended stuff, perhaps, but with the hint of a story all the same.
About 3,000 diseases are known to have a genetic component.
In addition to those definitively caused by a single variant allele, many more conditions arise from complex interactions of multiple genes and other contributing factors.
When my data come back from China, I'll learn, at best, very rough estimates of the risks I face for a handful of conditions.
Yet a quick back-of-the-envelope calculation of the frequencies of known genetic diseases in the general population suggests that I should prepare to receive a dozen or more of what Kiirikki calls “red ﬂags.”
I try to imagine the worst case, something like Huntington's: a definitive prediction of a horrific monogenetic disease without any treatment beyond general symptom management.
I might learn that I am a prime candidate for early Alzheimer's.
I might learn that my risk of macular degeneration is several times the base rate.
I might learn of susceptibilities for ALS or Crohn's disease or schizophrenia or prostate, bladder, or lung cancer.
I guess I'm groundlessly hoping that my own red ﬂags will be limited to elevated risks for things like heart disease or diabetes, odds that I might be able to tilt slightly in my favor by prophylactic intervention or behavioral changes.
In any case, I'll live with whatever I learn from here on out.
No possible good news can be hiding in my genome except, at best, no definitive news at all.
In the last twenty steps to the clinic door, all I can think about is the “common-sense rule of medicine” cited some years ago by Bernadine Healy, the former director of the NIH, in the New England Journal of Medicine : “Don't order a test if you lack the facts to know how to interpret the result.”
The doctor—a moonlighting radiologist—asks to see my driver's license before he draws the blood.
I show him mine, which I easily could have faked.
I imagine all the new identity crimes that cheap whole-genome scans invite—genetic blackmail, forgery, even framing someone at the scene of a crime.
The doctor tells me he will get his own genome scanned, when the price is right.
He thinks for a moment and says he'd do it for $200.
“But only if they don't tell me anything bad,” he jokes.
He compares the risks to the notorious ones in his own specialty, radiology, where a great number of images reveal small ambiguous spots and shadows that produce nothing but targetless anxiety in the patient.
But he concedes that all of recent health care has been pushing toward a fuller engagement of the patient in risk assessment and treatment evaluation.
That's proactive medicine: For better or worse, the days of the unassailable doctor-priests are over.
As if to prove the point, the doc misses my vein.
Twice.
He has to call in the head phlebotomist.
She switches to my other arm and expertly retrieves four vials.
As she works, I ask her if she would get her own genes sequenced.
Her face sets in a look of polite doubt.
“I don't know,” she says.
“I'd have to think hard about it.” I watch my blood disappear in multiple layers of protective swaddling into the biohazard box.
I think about all the notorious sealed boxes that stack up in world fiction, boxes whose contents are not to be messed with.
We leave the clinic with the sealed carton.
Kiirikki places it into the backseat of the Infiniti and keeps it in a documentable “chain of custody” all the way to FedEx.
At the FedEx office, a rattled agent has to call up a regional manager in order to approve the shipment of blood.
Then my four vials are on their way to China via New Jersey.
They will come back as data, four gigabytes of a four-letter message stored on something like a digital-camera memory card, only this device will supposedly self-destruct if anyone tries to hack into it.
In short, my DNA is as safe as data ever can be.
I, on the other hand, will never feel completely secure again.
CLIMAX
I ﬂy back to the vast lunar grain-wastes of spring in east central Illinois.
